cambodian genocide is it would you call
it i want to ask you how did you get
interested in cambodia and it's possible
the answer is my youtube channel but how
would
you how did you get yourself to watch
okay cool cool cool yeah it was just a
book i bought it was it was something
weird it's called like the four
horsemen and it was like a really
depressing
sort of uh photojournalism book
so this guy went to like multiple places
it was a book from the 80s
you went to lebanon and cambodia
and vietnam and a bunch of places and
just like essays about what
horrors were happening and photos and
i just remember like that i think that
was the first time where i kind of was
like reading about it and
learning a bit about it and then i
remember you know watching documentaries
and learning about
carpet bombing and all this craziness
that led to the khmer rouge and yeah and
then just kind of dug into it so
but it's it's interesting to me because
for people in the audience who don't
know you've lived there
for a while i understand and i don't
i've heard you mention this and i've
studied the language and all that stuff
too yeah yeah okay there you go yeah so
i don't i don't know too much about it
i've
kind of always been curious like why
cambodia and when did that start when
did your interest start and
what was the deal behind your cambodian
well look i'll just say
uh i haven't asked you the parallel set
of questions about how happy or unhappy
you are in canada
but if uh if you want to build your
character a little bit
let me tell you the future is in
cambodia and it's happening right now
so you're you're a few years younger
than me um
you can you can you could have a really
interesting next decade of your life
if you want to have a foothold in
cambodia and of course you don't have to
be there
12 months a year you could be there
three months a year or six months a year
but um today in 2020
cambodia is a much different place from
what it was when i first went there
i will always remember i was wearing
combat boots at that time with steel toe
i had to be ready to defend myself all
the time
and i had my money in the soles of my
boots
um you know the big bills you know i
forget maybe i had a thousand dollars in
cash on me something like that
and it was in thai currency in the soles
of my boots
and i was you know kind of ready to go
come i
i came through uh the jungle river route
over land from the southeast corner of
laos
down through and eventually so down
through a whole bunch of towns nobody's
heard of and nobody cares about and
where of course nobody speaks english
and eventually ended up in the in the
capital city in phnom penh
and i'll always remember when i took the
money out of my boots
the uh the heat had been so intense
that the top bill on each side under the
foot
that was being crowned into the boot had
been ruined so i lost like 2 000
tie bot from the key the friction of
carrying the money in the bottom of my
boots
so i mean it was rough back then it's
gotten less and less rough
and you know it was a place where the
greatest danger to you were the cops
themselves
if you got a problem not you know so i
did get to see i was there at the very
end of the real cambodia and you know
when there was no
internet and no electricity in that
stuff you know what i mean
if that's if that's what you're into you
know approximately how old were you
god sorry great great question without
looking up so was it
15 years ago some of that right
so uh my daughter is seven years old
so yeah i mean well i first got
interested in cambodia way back
2001. the first time i got the books out
of the library and started studying the
cambodian language and history cambodia
was way back then
and i assumed i was going to start in
cambodia i was like okay great i'm going
to get an english teaching certificate
and i'm going to go out and do a
combination of teaching english
historical research humanitarian work
like volunteer for all the humanitarian
work i can get
and survive by teaching english and uh
so your audience won't
know this i wasn't just studying the
modern language i was also studying the
ancient language pali
so pali is the ancient scriptural
language of buddhist philosophy
so it was doing all that simultaneously
it was a very
intellectually stimulating time of my
life and
maybe a somewhat emotionally deprived
time in my life
you know when i look back now maybe i
wasn't making the the best decisions
on my own behalf you know just in terms
of my own self-interest but nevertheless
um so yeah there's a combination of
language historical
humanitarian all these all these
interests coming together driving in
cambodia
but i first okay so gee
how to make a long story short i ended
up first living in hong kong
then taiwan then thailand bangkok
thailand
then uh the capital city of laos chan
then i had years in laos and much later
ended up in cambodia so i did visit
cambodia
before that like before i actually lived
there continuously
and cambodia was always on my radar i
remember saying to people in laos
you know cambodia feels
big to me like it seems enormous
and ancient and important and when i'm
here in laos
everything seems small and trivial and
the the history isn't as deep
uh just in terms of centuries there's
not many not as many centuries of
history
and the massacres aren't as big i mean
you know you've seen some
cambodia these are this is mass murder
on an unbelievable scale the violence
in cambodia is just mind-boggling you
know in laos there's a little bit of
violence there
you know but it's it's like the smurfs
compared to the land of giants you know
cambodia still had that
quality so i i did eventually end up
living and working in cambodia
but not it wasn't the first place i
lived it it felt like it was the last
place i lived it was the end of a long
long journey of living and working for
many years in asia before i got to
cambodia
interesting um so you were talking about
so just quickly
why can't bo so like i was going to say
why cambodia but i guess it wasn't it
wasn't just
my understanding was you had like
specifically singled out cambodia and
you traveled there
so you were just doing this whole kind
of tour no so
i did though that's that's the
interesting thing so like when i was
still in canada
uh before i left for asia it was
cambodia that i chose
so i remember i had various university
professors i talked to
about this i was looking for a language
where i could combine my humanitarian
interests you could
to be blunt my political interests my
interest in the reality of the world as
it exists
today which has a lot to do with poverty
and you know
it has a lot to do with humanitarian
concerns but it's fundamentally
political
um i wanted to be able to do that and
then also work on
the ancient history the language
buddhism as a philosophy as a religion
i didn't want to be a philosopher cut
off from political reality i want to be
a philosopher who plunged into and
really
dealt with or drowned in you know
contemporary political violence i wanted
to i wanted to literally go out and get
my
my feet wet my hands dirty and work on
the farms work on a rice farm
uh you know help people on you know ice
farm you know see see whatever the state
of the poverty and
uh anarchy in a pejorative sense was as
these countries have
emerged in their post-war you know
squalor and so on
and see the consequences of the american
bombing of these countries they're full
of craters you know that's a whole other
aspect of the story but no uh i looked
at
many different options i looked at
mongolia i considered learning mongolian
so you can imagine also mongolia has
some of those same factors mongolia used
to be a communist country
today it's a democracy has a language a
modern language that is in some ways
linked to
an ancient language for buddhist
philosophy but in some ways a totally
different language
um you know mongolia presented a lot of
the same opportunities and challenges
but no it wasn't mongolia that won what
i really decided was it was it was
cambodia for my own future
so yeah already in toronto before i left
i was writing of the cambodian alphabet
and i was learning to read pali the
ancient buddhist philosophy
in its cambodian iteration in the
cambodian orthography
so yeah i had all this stuff come
together and uh sorry looking really
briefly again
your viewers know this but both of my
parents were communists my mother and my
father were communist
extremists so the history of cambodia
it's one of those things where you hold
up the mirror uh you hold the mirror to
the reality of human nature
you hold the mirror to the reality of
civilization
but also in my case you're holding up
the mirror to your own
family the excuses they made for mass
murder my parents were pro-violence they
were pro-revolution they were pro-mass
murder
and you know it's confronting them and
it's confronting my own
childhood delusions and then you know
moving forward and trying to do
something positive out of the ashes
so yeah for me the significance of
communism
and mass murder in cambodia is a little
bit different because i grew up with
a family who supported that who told me
that it was good and right and justified
so and for me becoming an adult partly
had to do with challenging and
overturning my parents
values so yeah can we i'd like to talk
about that for a little bit because it's
do it i'm interested in uh and
and communism in general is something
i'm kind of interested in at the moment
um
so when you say they act it's like they
advocated for matt you're thinking
specifically about
like khmer rouge like they were
sympathetic to the communist
cambodian dictatorship yes so the the
short answer is my parents were
real communists they supported the most
extreme
most violent forms of of communism they
weren't insincere halfway economy i'm
not i'm not saying that to insult anyone
obviously it would be morally superior
to not support mass murder
um but i guess you could say i had the
advantage of not being raised with
parents
who were well put this way there's a
difference between having parents who
are say holocaust deniers
and having parents who admit that the
holocaust happened who say yes it
happened
but who supported it like if you had
parents who were actually nazis who
worked for adolf maybe they worked in
the concentration camp
a lot of people in germany must have had
parents or grandparents who actually
worked in the
concentration camps and actually
supported it right like they're not
denying it
that was positively what what they were
about politically so it's a very very
different sort of thing
but yeah they they supported the most
brutal most terrible excesses of
communism for example in tibet
um they supported the destruction of
tibet but the chinese communist party
and destruction of tibetan culture and
so on so you know there was no uh
there was no sitting on the fence with
them and
yeah i mean that ideology is so
simple that you can understand it as a
child i would say it's a childlike
ideology um but then you reach a fork in
the road where it's like am i gonna keep
making excuses
for this the way my parents do am i
gonna pretend that things make sense
that really don't make sense or am i
gonna you know
acknowledge what's wrong and evil about
this and start
you know doing my own research and
coming to my own conclusions
so was there a time there was a time
that you can remember when you were just
kind of
let's say indoctrinated by your parents
and you were going along with it and you
had kind of like an awakening we were
like wait a second
yes yes yes well and you know
uh one of the realest moments in my life
to be not
captured on video camera was me
confronting my father about that
a very short time before he died my dog
my father was basically on his death bed
he had this
condition that killed him in hospital
very very gradually so it's not like he
died that day but still he was he was in
the bed where he was gonna die
but you know i really confronted my
father because he was in denial about it
and he was
he was claiming that no he hadn't
indoctrinated me and hadn't raised me to
be a communist and i really had to
passionately say to him no
look like this was my childhood this is
the reality of what i grew up with this
is what you taught me
at the dinner table every night and um
you know of course it's quite common to
meet people who were indoctrinated into
say
you know christianity islam mormonism
any other
or crazy cult religion but the
big difference is that when you're
indoctrinated into communism as a child
you go out and look at the newspapers
for sale in the newspaper stand
and you see gorbachev you see the soviet
union you see mao zedong you see
the stuff they're talking about you see
nuclear weapons like
it's not that the newspapers are saying
the same things that my parents are
saying
but the imaginary things my parents
believed in
the outside world was always confirming
to be real
that it was real that it was a big deal
you know
so if you grew up in a crazy cult
version of christianity any mainstream
religion like this or hinduism
you know you're training yourself as a
child to believe in things you never see
and things you never hear but raising a
child with communism
they're being trained to believe in
things that they see all the time you
see it confirmed all the time
you know you hear all the time that cuba
is this important country
now of course my parents actually
supported communist dictatorship in cuba
like the news isn't going to do that
but still you know that's that's being
affirmed for you all the time that
cuba is this real place that really
matters and in those days of course this
is before 1989
also if anything the mainstream press
was massively exaggerating
the importance the wealth the success
the military power
of those those communist countries
do you um wait so okay so go back though
do you recall was it a particular was
there something was there an incident or
was there something you saw or read
about that made you kind of
change your perspective on communism
oh yeah sure i mean i would say the the
most important shift was during
university and during my first year of
university
because at that point i was already too
smart and too well informed
to be a conv to really believe what my
parents had taught me but like
there was still the option of being kind
of academic marxist
and back then people use the term
marxian like oh
you're not marxist but you're marxian
like i'm a
like you're a sophisticated person who's
still involved with this
so like the final you know turning point
is like
okay am i still gonna make some excuses
to some extent and try to be a part of
this intellectual tradition
or no am i really going to accept
this is bad and evil and wrong this
really fundamentally
is about justifying mass murder it
fundamentally
is about justifying class struggle and
refusing to allow democracy to exist
like that's
really a lot of what communism is about
is using violence to destroy democracy
and then to perpetuate the regime after
that that's that's created that way
um so that that was that was really the
most important turning point
but sure earlier i mean in terms of
childhood or high school years
sure there are a whole bunch of uh a
whole bunch of wake up points
and you know of course the easier road
to have taken would have been to just
not care about politics
that's that's what you're not asking me
you know i'm sorry i'm not complaining
but i mean i think a lot of people were
raised in the type of family i was
raised in
they would respond to it by just
concluding all politics is
i'm just going to stop caring about
politics and i'm going to go party you
know going to go to something else my
life or something
but i came to conclusions you know
politics really matter
economics also really matters i still
really care about the study of economics
however marxist economics are complete
you know that just the
particular school of thought that i was
raised in
um was was meaningless and worthless and
bad yeah
i got a lot of follow-up questions i
need to say great okay cool i have a lot
of water to drink so just take a quick
break do you need to take a break or do
you want to do
hey man cue the music i don't know do
you have an animated uh
segue i'll put something on uh
great i could just just give me two
minutes no problem at all
folks